README.md, before:

# PLC Self-Healing Middleware (plc-remedy)

A Flask-based manufacturing middleware application that monitors Allen-Bradley PLCs via CIP protocol, detects anomalies based on configurable thresholds, and triggers automated remediation through Ansible Automation Platform (AAP).

This project implements the research described in SAE Paper "From Reactive to Proactive: Applying Data Analysis and Automation to Mitigate PLC Communication Disruptions" (26MFG-0011).

## Features

- **Real-time PLC Monitoring**: Continuous polling of PLC tags via CIP protocol using pycomm3
- **Threshold Detection**: Configurable failure conditions (equals, not_equals, outside_range, below, above)
- **Automated Remediation**: Integration with Ansible Automation Platform for self-healing actions
- **Web Dashboard**: Real-time dashboard with Socket.IO updates, Chart.js visualizations, and event logging
- **Chaos Engineering**: Configurable failure injection for testing and validation
- **REST API**: Comprehensive API for integration and automation
- **Containerized**: Ready for deployment with Podman/Docker

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────┐         ┌──────────────┐         ┌─────────────┐
│   PLC       │◄───────►│  Middleware  │◄───────►│     AAP      │
│ (CIP)       │         │   (Flask)    │         │  (Ansible)   │
└─────────────┘         └──────────────┘         └─────────────┘
                              │
                              ▼
                        ┌─────────────┐
                        │  Dashboard   │
                        │  (Web UI)    │
                        └─────────────┘
```

## Prerequisites

- Python 3.10+
- Podman or Docker (for containerized deployment)
- Access to Allen-Bradley PLC (or use mock PLC simulator)
- Ansible Automation Platform (optional, mock mode available)
- tmux (for testing with the wrapper script - see Testing section)

## Installation

### Installing Conda

Conda is the recommended Python environment manager for this project. If you don't have conda installed, follow the instructions below for your platform.

#### macOS

**Option 1: Using Homebrew (Recommended)**
```bash
# Install Miniconda via Homebrew
brew install miniconda

# Initialize conda for your shell (usually zsh or bash)
conda init "$(basename "$SHELL")"

# Restart your terminal or reload shell configuration
source ~/.zshrc  # or ~/.bash_profile for bash
```

**Option 2: Using Miniconda Installer**
```bash
# Download Miniconda installer
curl -O https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-MacOSX-x86_64.sh

# Run installer
bash Miniconda3-latest-MacOSX-x86_64.sh

# Follow the prompts, then restart your terminal
# Initialize conda
conda init "$(basename "$SHELL")"
source ~/.zshrc  # or ~/.bash_profile
```

**Option 3: Using Anaconda Installer**
Download the Anaconda installer from [anaconda.com](https://www.anaconda.com/products/distribution) and follow the installation wizard.

**Verification:**
```bash
conda --version
# Should display: conda 23.x.x (or similar)
```

#### Ubuntu/Debian

**Using Miniconda Installer (Recommended)**
```bash
# Download Miniconda installer for Linux
wget https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Make installer executable
chmod +x Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Run installer
bash Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Follow the prompts (accept license, choose installation location)
# When asked, choose "yes" to initialize conda

# Reload shell configuration
source ~/.bashrc  # or ~/.zshrc if using zsh
```

**Alternative: Using Anaconda Installer**
```bash
# Download Anaconda installer
wget https://repo.anaconda.com/archive/Anaconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Make executable and run
chmod +x Anaconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
bash Anaconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Initialize conda
source ~/.bashrc
```

**Verification:**
```bash
conda --version
# Should display: conda 23.x.x (or similar)
```

**Note:** If conda is not found after installation, you may need to manually initialize it:
```bash
# For bash
echo 'eval "$(/path/to/miniconda3/bin/conda shell.bash hook)"' >> ~/.bashrc
source ~/.bashrc

# For zsh
echo 'eval "$(/path/to/miniconda3/bin/conda shell.zsh hook)"' >> ~/.zshrc
source ~/.zshrc
```

#### RHEL/CentOS

**Using Miniconda Installer (Recommended)**
```bash
# Download Miniconda installer for Linux
wget https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Make installer executable
chmod +x Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Run installer
bash Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Follow the prompts (accept license, choose installation location)
# When asked, choose "yes" to initialize conda

# Reload shell configuration
source ~/.bashrc  # or ~/.zshrc if using zsh
```

**Alternative: Using Anaconda Installer**
```bash
# Download Anaconda installer
wget https://repo.anaconda.com/archive/Anaconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Make executable and run
chmod +x Anaconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
bash Anaconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Initialize conda
source ~/.bashrc
```

**Verification:**
```bash
conda --version
# Should display: conda 23.x.x (or similar)
```

**Note:** If conda is not found after installation, you may need to manually initialize it:
```bash
# For bash
echo 'eval "$(/path/to/miniconda3/bin/conda shell.bash hook)"' >> ~/.bashrc
source ~/.bashrc

# For zsh
echo 'eval "$(/path/to/miniconda3/bin/conda shell.zsh hook)"' >> ~/.zshrc
source ~/.zshrc
```

#### Additional Resources

- [Conda Documentation](https://docs.conda.io/)
- [Miniconda Installation Guide](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html)
- [Anaconda Installation Guide](https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/install/)

**Note:** If you prefer not to use conda, you can use Python's built-in `venv` module as an alternative (see Option B in the Local Development section below).

### Local Development

1. Clone the repository:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/mrjoshuap/plc-remedy.git
cd plc-remedy
```

2. **Set up Python environment (Recommended: Conda):**

**Option A: Using Conda (Recommended)**
```bash
# Create conda environment
conda create -n plc-remedy python=3.10
conda activate plc-remedy

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

**Option B: Using Virtual Environment (Alternative)**
```bash
# Create virtual environment
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

4. Configure the application:
```bash
cp config/config.yaml.example config/config.yaml
# Edit config/config.yaml with your PLC and AAP settings
```

5. Set environment variables (if needed):
```bash
export AAP_TOKEN="your-aap-token"
```

6. Run the application:
```bash
python run.py
```

The dashboard will be available at http://localhost:15000

### Containerized Deployment

1. Build the container:
```bash
podman build -t plc-remedy:latest .
```

2. Run the container:
```bash
podman run -d \
  --name plc-remedy \
  -p 15000:5000 \
  -v ./config:/app/config:ro \
  -e AAP_TOKEN="${AAP_TOKEN}" \
  plc-remedy:latest
```

3. Access the dashboard at http://localhost:15000

## Configuration

Configuration is managed via `config/config.yaml`. See `config/config.yaml.example` for a complete example.

### Key Configuration Sections

#### PLC Settings
```yaml
plc:
  ip_address: "192.168.1.100"
  slot: 0
  timeout: 5.0
  poll_interval_ms: 1000
```

#### Tag Monitoring
```yaml
tags:
  motor_speed:
    name: "Motor_Speed"
    type: "int"
    nominal: 1750
    failure_condition: "outside_range"
    failure_threshold_low: 1500
    failure_threshold_high: 2000
```

#### AAP Integration
```yaml
aap:
  enabled: true
  mock_mode: true  # Set to false for real AAP
  base_url: "https://aap.example.com"
  token: "${AAP_TOKEN}"  # Environment variable
  job_templates:
    emergency_stop: 42
    emergency_reset: 43
```

#### Logging Configuration
```yaml
logging:
  level: INFO  # Log level: DEBUG, INFO, WARNING, ERROR, CRITICAL
  format: "%(asctime)s - %(name)s - %(levelname)s - %(message)s"  # Optional: custom log format
```

**Valid log levels:**
- `DEBUG`: Detailed diagnostic information (most verbose)
- `INFO`: General informational messages (default)
- `WARNING`: Warning messages for potential issues
- `ERROR`: Error messages for failures
- `CRITICAL`: Critical errors that may cause the application to stop

The log level is case-insensitive. If the `logging` section is omitted, the default level is `INFO`.

## Mock PLC Simulator

### CIP-Compatible Mock PLC (Recommended)

A new **CIP-compatible mock PLC** is available that works seamlessly with `pycomm3`:

```bash
python mock/cip_plc.py --ip 127.0.0.1 --port 44818 --mode normal
```

**Features:**
- Full CIP protocol support via `cpppo` library
- Compatible with pycomm3 LogixDriver
- Session registration and Forward Open support
- Tag read/write operations
- All operating modes (normal, degraded, failed, unresponsive)

**Requirements:**
All dependencies are installed via requirements.txt:
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

**Important:** Due to limitations in the cpppo library and pycomm3's protocol handling, the mock PLC must simulate a Micro800 PLC. This is because pycomm3 only disables Multiple Service Packets (MSP) for Micro800 devices, which is necessary since the mock PLC cannot properly handle MSP requests. The application automatically configures pycomm3 to treat the mock PLC as a Micro800 device when in mock mode.

See [MOCK_PLC_LIMITATIONS.md](MOCK_PLC_LIMITATIONS.md) for details on mock PLC limitations.

### Operating Modes

Both mock PLCs support the same operating modes:
- `normal`: Returns nominal values with small variance
- `degraded`: Gradually drifts toward failure thresholds
- `failed`: Returns failure condition values
- `unresponsive`: Stops responding (simulates network issues)

### Alternative Options

1. **Use a real PLC** (recommended for production testing) - Update config.yaml with your PLC IP
2. **Use a commercial PLC simulator** - FactoryTalk Linx, RSLogix Emulate, etc.
3. **Test other features** - The app will run without PLC connection, allowing you to test dashboard, API, and AAP integration

## Usage

### Web Dashboard

1. Open http://localhost:15000 in your browser
2. Monitor real-time tag values, connection status, and violations
3. View time-series charts for motor speed and light status
4. Trigger manual remediation actions
5. Enable/configure chaos injection for testing
6. View event log and AAP job status

### REST API

#### Health & Status
```bash
# Health check
curl http://localhost:15000/api/v1/health

# Get current status
curl http://localhost:15000/api/v1/status
```

#### Tags & Metrics
```bash
# Get all tag values
curl http://localhost:15000/api/v1/tags

# Get specific tag with history
curl http://localhost:15000/api/v1/tags/Motor_Speed

# Get aggregated metrics
curl http://localhost:15000/api/v1/metrics
```

#### Events
```bash
# Get recent events
curl http://localhost:15000/api/v1/events

# Get active violations
curl http://localhost:15000/api/v1/events/violations?active=true
```

#### Remediation
```bash
# Trigger emergency stop
curl -X POST http://localhost:15000/api/v1/remediate/stop

# Trigger emergency reset
curl -X POST http://localhost:15000/api/v1/remediate/reset

# Get remediation status
curl http://localhost:15000/api/v1/remediate/status
```

#### Chaos Engineering
```bash
# Get chaos status
curl http://localhost:15000/api/v1/chaos/status

# Enable chaos injection
curl -X POST http://localhost:15000/api/v1/chaos/enable

# Inject specific failure
curl -X POST http://localhost:15000/api/v1/chaos/inject \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"failure_type": "connection_loss", "duration_seconds": 10}'
```

**Note:** When chaos injection is enabled, failure conditions (especially `value_anomaly`) persist for a random duration between 1 and 180 seconds. This simulates real-world transient failures that may resolve on their own or require remediation.

### Ansible Playbooks

The project includes Ansible playbooks for remediation actions:

```bash
# Emergency stop
ansible-playbook -i ansible/inventory/hosts.yml ansible/playbooks/emergency_stop.yml

# Emergency reset
ansible-playbook -i ansible/inventory/hosts.yml ansible/playbooks/emergency_reset.yml

# Gather metrics
ansible-playbook -i ansible/inventory/hosts.yml ansible/playbooks/gather_metrics.yml
```

## API Documentation

### Response Format

All API responses follow this structure:

```json
{
  "success": true,
  "timestamp": "2024-01-15T10:30:00Z",
  "data": { ... },
  "error": null
}
```

### Endpoints

| Method | Endpoint | Description |
|--------|----------|-------------|
| GET | `/api/v1/health` | Application health check |
| GET | `/api/v1/status` | PLC connection status and tag values |
| GET | `/api/v1/tags` | Current values for all tags |
| GET | `/api/v1/tags/{tag_name}` | Specific tag value and history |
| GET | `/api/v1/metrics` | Aggregated metrics |
| GET | `/api/v1/events` | Recent events (paginated) |
| GET | `/api/v1/events/violations` | Active threshold violations |
| POST | `/api/v1/remediate/{action}` | Trigger remediation (stop/reset/restart) |
| GET | `/api/v1/remediate/status` | Remediation job status |
| GET | `/api/v1/chaos/status` | Chaos engine status |
| POST | `/api/v1/chaos/enable` | Enable chaos injection |
| POST | `/api/v1/chaos/disable` | Disable chaos injection |
| POST | `/api/v1/chaos/inject` | Manually inject failure |
| GET | `/api/v1/config` | Current configuration (sanitized) |

## Development

### Project Structure

```
plc-remedy/
├── app/
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── config.py              # Configuration loader
│   ├── plc_client.py          # PLC communication
│   ├── aap_client.py          # AAP API integration
│   ├── monitor.py             # Polling and threshold detection
│   ├── chaos.py               # Chaos engineering
│   ├── models.py              # Data models
│   ├── api/                   # REST API
│   ├── web/                   # Web dashboard
│   └── templates/             # HTML templates
├── ansible/                   # Ansible playbooks
├── mock/                      # Mock PLC and AAP simulators
├── config/                    # Configuration files
├── tests/                     # Unit tests
├── Containerfile             # Container definition
├── requirements.txt          # Python dependencies
└── run.py                    # Application entry point
```

### Running Tests

#### Unit Tests

```bash
pytest tests/
```

#### Testing with tmux Wrapper Script

For easy testing with all components running simultaneously, use the `run_tests.sh` wrapper script. This script uses tmux to display all component logs in a single window with 3 panes (1 column, 3 rows).

**Install tmux:**

- **macOS**: `brew install tmux`
- **Linux**: `sudo apt-get install tmux` (or use your distribution's package manager)
- **Other**: See [tmux installation guide](https://github.com/tmux/tmux/wiki/Installing)

**Using the wrapper script:**

```bash
./run_tests.sh
```

This will start:
- **Top pane**: Mock PLC (port 44818)
- **Middle pane**: Mock AAP (port 8080)
- **Bottom pane**: Main application (port 15000)

All logs are visible simultaneously in the tmux window. The script prevents detaching/reattaching - when you exit tmux (Ctrl+C or closing the terminal), all components will stop automatically.

**Stopping the test environment:**

- Press `Ctrl+C` in any pane, or
- Type `exit` in any pane, or
- Close the terminal window

All processes will be cleaned up automatically when the tmux session ends.

### Code Style

The project follows PEP 8 style guidelines. Consider using `black` for code formatting:

```bash
pip install black
black app/ tests/
```

## Troubleshooting

### PLC Connection Issues

1. Verify PLC IP address and network connectivity
2. Check firewall rules (CIP uses port 44818)
3. Ensure PLC slot number is correct (typically 0)
4. Review connection timeout settings

### AAP Integration Issues

1. Verify AAP base URL and authentication token
2. Check job template IDs match your AAP instance
3. Enable mock mode for testing: `mock_mode: true`
4. Review AAP API logs for errors

### Dashboard Not Updating

1. Check browser console for WebSocket connection errors
2. Verify Socket.IO server is running
3. Check application logs for errors
4. Ensure eventlet worker is used (required for Socket.IO)

## Limitations

- **Mock PLC**: The mock PLC simulator has some limitations (see [MOCK_PLC_LIMITATIONS.md](MOCK_PLC_LIMITATIONS.md)). For full CIP compatibility, use a real PLC or commercial simulator.
- **Data Persistence**: Currently uses in-memory storage. For production, consider adding SQLite or PostgreSQL persistence.
- **Single PLC**: The current implementation monitors one PLC. Multi-PLC support can be added by extending the architecture.

## Future Enhancements

- [ ] OPC UA protocol support
- [ ] Modbus TCP support
- [ ] PostgreSQL persistence layer
- [ ] Multi-PLC monitoring
- [ ] Advanced analytics and ML-based anomaly detection
- [ ] Integration with Grafana/Prometheus
- [ ] Role-based access control (RBAC)

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Add tests
5. Submit a pull request

## License

[Specify your license here]

## References

- SAE Paper 26MFG-0011: "From Reactive to Proactive: Applying Data Analysis and Automation to Mitigate PLC Communication Disruptions"
- [pycomm3 Documentation](https://github.com/ottowayi/pycomm3)
- [Ansible CIP Collection](https://github.com/ansible-collections/community.cip)
- [Flask-SocketIO Documentation](https://flask-socketio.readthedocs.io/)

## Support

For issues and questions:
- Open an issue on GitHub
- Contact the development team
- Review the troubleshooting section above

Commit message:

Update mock PLC configuration and protocol handling for improved clarity and functionality
- Enhanced documentation in MOCK_PLC_LIMITATIONS.md and README.md to clarify the behavior of `mock_mode` and `protocol_mode`, emphasizing that `mock_mode: true` always uses serial mode regardless of the `protocol_mode` setting.
- Updated app configuration to include validation for `protocol_mode`, ensuring only valid options ('serial' or 'msp') are accepted.
- Adjusted PLCClient logic to determine when to force Micro800 mode based on the configuration, improving handling of Multiple Service Packets (MSP) for mock PLCs.
- Reflected changes in example configuration files to guide users on proper setup for mock and production environments.

README.md, after:

# PLC Self-Healing Middleware (plc-remedy)

A Flask-based manufacturing middleware application that monitors Allen-Bradley PLCs via CIP protocol, detects anomalies based on configurable thresholds, and triggers automated remediation through Ansible Automation Platform (AAP).

This project implements the research described in SAE Paper "From Reactive to Proactive: Applying Data Analysis and Automation to Mitigate PLC Communication Disruptions" (26MFG-0011).

## Features

- **Real-time PLC Monitoring**: Continuous polling of PLC tags via CIP protocol using pycomm3
- **Threshold Detection**: Configurable failure conditions (equals, not_equals, outside_range, below, above)
- **Automated Remediation**: Integration with Ansible Automation Platform for self-healing actions
- **Web Dashboard**: Real-time dashboard with Socket.IO updates, Chart.js visualizations, and event logging
- **Chaos Engineering**: Configurable failure injection for testing and validation
- **REST API**: Comprehensive API for integration and automation
- **Containerized**: Ready for deployment with Podman/Docker

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────┐         ┌──────────────┐         ┌─────────────┐
│   PLC       │◄───────►│  Middleware  │◄───────►│     AAP      │
│ (CIP)       │         │   (Flask)    │         │  (Ansible)   │
└─────────────┘         └──────────────┘         └─────────────┘
                              │
                              ▼
                        ┌─────────────┐
                        │  Dashboard   │
                        │  (Web UI)    │
                        └─────────────┘
```

## Prerequisites

- Python 3.10+
- Podman or Docker (for containerized deployment)
- Access to Allen-Bradley PLC (or use mock PLC simulator)
- Ansible Automation Platform (optional, mock mode available)
- tmux (for testing with the wrapper script - see Testing section)

## Installation

### Installing Conda

Conda is the recommended Python environment manager for this project. If you don't have conda installed, follow the instructions below for your platform.

#### macOS

**Option 1: Using Homebrew (Recommended)**
```bash
# Install Miniconda via Homebrew
brew install miniconda

# Initialize conda for your shell (usually zsh or bash)
conda init "$(basename "$SHELL")"

# Restart your terminal or reload shell configuration
source ~/.zshrc  # or ~/.bash_profile for bash
```

**Option 2: Using Miniconda Installer**
```bash
# Download Miniconda installer
curl -O https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-MacOSX-x86_64.sh

# Run installer
bash Miniconda3-latest-MacOSX-x86_64.sh

# Follow the prompts, then restart your terminal
# Initialize conda
conda init "$(basename "$SHELL")"
source ~/.zshrc  # or ~/.bash_profile
```

**Option 3: Using Anaconda Installer**
Download the Anaconda installer from [anaconda.com](https://www.anaconda.com/products/distribution) and follow the installation wizard.

**Verification:**
```bash
conda --version
# Should display: conda 23.x.x (or similar)
```

#### Ubuntu/Debian

**Using Miniconda Installer (Recommended)**
```bash
# Download Miniconda installer for Linux
wget https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Make installer executable
chmod +x Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Run installer
bash Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Follow the prompts (accept license, choose installation location)
# When asked, choose "yes" to initialize conda

# Reload shell configuration
source ~/.bashrc  # or ~/.zshrc if using zsh
```

**Alternative: Using Anaconda Installer**
```bash
# Download Anaconda installer
wget https://repo.anaconda.com/archive/Anaconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Make executable and run
chmod +x Anaconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
bash Anaconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Initialize conda
source ~/.bashrc
```

**Verification:**
```bash
conda --version
# Should display: conda 23.x.x (or similar)
```

**Note:** If conda is not found after installation, you may need to manually initialize it:
```bash
# For bash
echo 'eval "$(/path/to/miniconda3/bin/conda shell.bash hook)"' >> ~/.bashrc
source ~/.bashrc

# For zsh
echo 'eval "$(/path/to/miniconda3/bin/conda shell.zsh hook)"' >> ~/.zshrc
source ~/.zshrc
```

#### RHEL/CentOS

**Using Miniconda Installer (Recommended)**
```bash
# Download Miniconda installer for Linux
wget https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Make installer executable
chmod +x Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Run installer
bash Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Follow the prompts (accept license, choose installation location)
# When asked, choose "yes" to initialize conda

# Reload shell configuration
source ~/.bashrc  # or ~/.zshrc if using zsh
```

**Alternative: Using Anaconda Installer**
```bash
# Download Anaconda installer
wget https://repo.anaconda.com/archive/Anaconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Make executable and run
chmod +x Anaconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
bash Anaconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh

# Initialize conda
source ~/.bashrc
```

**Verification:**
```bash
conda --version
# Should display: conda 23.x.x (or similar)
```

**Note:** If conda is not found after installation, you may need to manually initialize it:
```bash
# For bash
echo 'eval "$(/path/to/miniconda3/bin/conda shell.bash hook)"' >> ~/.bashrc
source ~/.bashrc

# For zsh
echo 'eval "$(/path/to/miniconda3/bin/conda shell.zsh hook)"' >> ~/.zshrc
source ~/.zshrc
```

#### Additional Resources

- [Conda Documentation](https://docs.conda.io/)
- [Miniconda Installation Guide](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html)
- [Anaconda Installation Guide](https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/install/)

**Note:** If you prefer not to use conda, you can use Python's built-in `venv` module as an alternative (see Option B in the Local Development section below).

### Local Development

1. Clone the repository:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/mrjoshuap/plc-remedy.git
cd plc-remedy
```

2. **Set up Python environment (Recommended: Conda):**

**Option A: Using Conda (Recommended)**
```bash
# Create conda environment
conda create -n plc-remedy python=3.10
conda activate plc-remedy

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

**Option B: Using Virtual Environment (Alternative)**
```bash
# Create virtual environment
python3 -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

4. Configure the application:
```bash
cp config/config.yaml.example config/config.yaml
# Edit config/config.yaml with your PLC and AAP settings
```

5. Set environment variables (if needed):
```bash
export AAP_TOKEN="your-aap-token"
```

6. Run the application:
```bash
python run.py
```

The dashboard will be available at http://localhost:15000

### Containerized Deployment

1. Build the container:
```bash
podman build -t plc-remedy:latest .
```

2. Run the container:
```bash
podman run -d \
  --name plc-remedy \
  -p 15000:5000 \
  -v ./config:/app/config:ro \
  -e AAP_TOKEN="${AAP_TOKEN}" \
  plc-remedy:latest
```

3. Access the dashboard at http://localhost:15000

## Configuration

Configuration is managed via `config/config.yaml`. See `config/config.yaml.example` for a complete example.

### Key Configuration Sections

#### PLC Settings
```yaml
plc:
  ip_address: "192.168.1.100"
  slot: 0
  timeout: 5.0
  poll_interval_ms: 1000
  mock_mode: false              # Set to true when using mock PLC
  protocol_mode: "serial"       # Protocol mode: "serial" (disable MSP) or "msp" (use pycomm3 default)
                                # Note: mock_mode always uses "serial" mode regardless of this setting
```

**Protocol Mode Options:**
- `"serial"` (default): Disables Multiple Service Packets (MSP) by forcing Micro800 mode. Use this for:
  - Mock PLCs (automatically used when `mock_mode: true`)
  - PLCs that don't support MSP
  - Compatibility with older PLCs
- `"msp"`: Uses pycomm3's default protocol logic, allowing MSP for supported PLCs. Use this for:
  - Modern ControlLogix/CompactLogix PLCs that support MSP
  - Production environments where MSP can improve performance

#### Tag Monitoring
```yaml
tags:
  motor_speed:
    name: "Motor_Speed"
    type: "int"
    nominal: 1750
    failure_condition: "outside_range"
    failure_threshold_low: 1500
    failure_threshold_high: 2000
```

#### AAP Integration
```yaml
aap:
  enabled: true
  mock_mode: true  # Set to false for real AAP
  base_url: "https://aap.example.com"
  token: "${AAP_TOKEN}"  # Environment variable
  job_templates:
    emergency_stop: 42
    emergency_reset: 43
```

#### Logging Configuration
```yaml
logging:
  level: INFO  # Log level: DEBUG, INFO, WARNING, ERROR, CRITICAL
  format: "%(asctime)s - %(name)s - %(levelname)s - %(message)s"  # Optional: custom log format
```

**Valid log levels:**
- `DEBUG`: Detailed diagnostic information (most verbose)
- `INFO`: General informational messages (default)
- `WARNING`: Warning messages for potential issues
- `ERROR`: Error messages for failures
- `CRITICAL`: Critical errors that may cause the application to stop

The log level is case-insensitive. If the `logging` section is omitted, the default level is `INFO`.

## Mock PLC Simulator

### CIP-Compatible Mock PLC (Recommended)

A new **CIP-compatible mock PLC** is available that works seamlessly with `pycomm3`:

```bash
python mock/cip_plc.py --ip 127.0.0.1 --port 44818 --mode normal
```

**Features:**
- Full CIP protocol support via `cpppo` library
- Compatible with pycomm3 LogixDriver
- Session registration and Forward Open support
- Tag read/write operations
- All operating modes (normal, degraded, failed, unresponsive)

**Requirements:**
All dependencies are installed via requirements.txt:
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

**Important:** Due to limitations in the cpppo library and pycomm3's protocol handling, the mock PLC must simulate a Micro800 PLC. This is because pycomm3 only disables Multiple Service Packets (MSP) for Micro800 devices, which is necessary since the mock PLC cannot properly handle MSP requests. The application automatically configures pycomm3 to treat the mock PLC as a Micro800 device when `mock_mode: true`, regardless of the `protocol_mode` setting.

For production PLCs, you can set `protocol_mode: "msp"` to use pycomm3's default protocol logic, which allows MSP for supported PLCs and can improve performance. The default `protocol_mode: "serial"` maintains backward compatibility and disables MSP.

See [MOCK_PLC_LIMITATIONS.md](MOCK_PLC_LIMITATIONS.md) for details on mock PLC limitations.

### Operating Modes

Both mock PLCs support the same operating modes:
- `normal`: Returns nominal values with small variance
- `degraded`: Gradually drifts toward failure thresholds
- `failed`: Returns failure condition values
- `unresponsive`: Stops responding (simulates network issues)

### Alternative Options

1. **Use a real PLC** (recommended for production testing) - Update config.yaml with your PLC IP
2. **Use a commercial PLC simulator** - FactoryTalk Linx, RSLogix Emulate, etc.
3. **Test other features** - The app will run without PLC connection, allowing you to test dashboard, API, and AAP integration

## Usage

### Web Dashboard

1. Open http://localhost:15000 in your browser
2. Monitor real-time tag values, connection status, and violations
3. View time-series charts for motor speed and light status
4. Trigger manual remediation actions
5. Enable/configure chaos injection for testing
6. View event log and AAP job status

### REST API

#### Health & Status
```bash
# Health check
curl http://localhost:15000/api/v1/health

# Get current status
curl http://localhost:15000/api/v1/status
```

#### Tags & Metrics
```bash
# Get all tag values
curl http://localhost:15000/api/v1/tags

# Get specific tag with history
curl http://localhost:15000/api/v1/tags/Motor_Speed

# Get aggregated metrics
curl http://localhost:15000/api/v1/metrics
```

#### Events
```bash
# Get recent events
curl http://localhost:15000/api/v1/events

# Get active violations
curl http://localhost:15000/api/v1/events/violations?active=true
```

#### Remediation
```bash
# Trigger emergency stop
curl -X POST http://localhost:15000/api/v1/remediate/stop

# Trigger emergency reset
curl -X POST http://localhost:15000/api/v1/remediate/reset

# Get remediation status
curl http://localhost:15000/api/v1/remediate/status
```

#### Chaos Engineering
```bash
# Get chaos status
curl http://localhost:15000/api/v1/chaos/status

# Enable chaos injection
curl -X POST http://localhost:15000/api/v1/chaos/enable

# Inject specific failure
curl -X POST http://localhost:15000/api/v1/chaos/inject \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"failure_type": "connection_loss", "duration_seconds": 10}'
```

**Note:** When chaos injection is enabled, failure conditions (especially `value_anomaly`) persist for a random duration between 1 and 180 seconds. This simulates real-world transient failures that may resolve on their own or require remediation.

### Ansible Playbooks

The project includes Ansible playbooks for remediation actions:

```bash
# Emergency stop
ansible-playbook -i ansible/inventory/hosts.yml ansible/playbooks/emergency_stop.yml

# Emergency reset
ansible-playbook -i ansible/inventory/hosts.yml ansible/playbooks/emergency_reset.yml

# Gather metrics
ansible-playbook -i ansible/inventory/hosts.yml ansible/playbooks/gather_metrics.yml
```

## API Documentation

### Response Format

All API responses follow this structure:

```json
{
  "success": true,
  "timestamp": "2024-01-15T10:30:00Z",
  "data": { ... },
  "error": null
}
```

### Endpoints

| Method | Endpoint | Description |
|--------|----------|-------------|
| GET | `/api/v1/health` | Application health check |
| GET | `/api/v1/status` | PLC connection status and tag values |
| GET | `/api/v1/tags` | Current values for all tags |
| GET | `/api/v1/tags/{tag_name}` | Specific tag value and history |
| GET | `/api/v1/metrics` | Aggregated metrics |
| GET | `/api/v1/events` | Recent events (paginated) |
| GET | `/api/v1/events/violations` | Active threshold violations |
| POST | `/api/v1/remediate/{action}` | Trigger remediation (stop/reset/restart) |
| GET | `/api/v1/remediate/status` | Remediation job status |
| GET | `/api/v1/chaos/status` | Chaos engine status |
| POST | `/api/v1/chaos/enable` | Enable chaos injection |
| POST | `/api/v1/chaos/disable` | Disable chaos injection |
| POST | `/api/v1/chaos/inject` | Manually inject failure |
| GET | `/api/v1/config` | Current configuration (sanitized) |

## Development

### Project Structure

```
plc-remedy/
├── app/
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── config.py              # Configuration loader
│   ├── plc_client.py          # PLC communication
│   ├── aap_client.py          # AAP API integration
│   ├── monitor.py             # Polling and threshold detection
│   ├── chaos.py               # Chaos engineering
│   ├── models.py              # Data models
│   ├── api/                   # REST API
│   ├── web/                   # Web dashboard
│   └── templates/             # HTML templates
├── ansible/                   # Ansible playbooks
├── mock/                      # Mock PLC and AAP simulators
├── config/                    # Configuration files
├── tests/                     # Unit tests
├── Containerfile             # Container definition
├── requirements.txt          # Python dependencies
└── run.py                    # Application entry point
```

### Running Tests

#### Unit Tests

```bash
pytest tests/
```

#### Testing with tmux Wrapper Script

For easy testing with all components running simultaneously, use the `run_tests.sh` wrapper script. This script uses tmux to display all component logs in a single window with 3 panes (1 column, 3 rows).

**Install tmux:**

- **macOS**: `brew install tmux`
- **Linux**: `sudo apt-get install tmux` (or use your distribution's package manager)
- **Other**: See [tmux installation guide](https://github.com/tmux/tmux/wiki/Installing)

**Using the wrapper script:**

```bash
./run_tests.sh
```

This will start:
- **Top pane**: Mock PLC (port 44818)
- **Middle pane**: Mock AAP (port 8080)
- **Bottom pane**: Main application (port 15000)

All logs are visible simultaneously in the tmux window. The script prevents detaching/reattaching - when you exit tmux (Ctrl+C or closing the terminal), all components will stop automatically.

**Stopping the test environment:**

- Press `Ctrl+C` in any pane, or
- Type `exit` in any pane, or
- Close the terminal window

All processes will be cleaned up automatically when the tmux session ends.

### Code Style

The project follows PEP 8 style guidelines. Consider using `black` for code formatting:

```bash
pip install black
black app/ tests/
```

## Troubleshooting

### PLC Connection Issues

1. Verify PLC IP address and network connectivity
2. Check firewall rules (CIP uses port 44818)
3. Ensure PLC slot number is correct (typically 0)
4. Review connection timeout settings

### AAP Integration Issues

1. Verify AAP base URL and authentication token
2. Check job template IDs match your AAP instance
3. Enable mock mode for testing: `mock_mode: true`
4. Review AAP API logs for errors

### Dashboard Not Updating

1. Check browser console for WebSocket connection errors
2. Verify Socket.IO server is running
3. Check application logs for errors
4. Ensure eventlet worker is used (required for Socket.IO)

## Limitations

- **Mock PLC**: The mock PLC simulator has some limitations (see [MOCK_PLC_LIMITATIONS.md](MOCK_PLC_LIMITATIONS.md)). For full CIP compatibility, use a real PLC or commercial simulator.
- **Data Persistence**: Currently uses in-memory storage. For production, consider adding SQLite or PostgreSQL persistence.
- **Single PLC**: The current implementation monitors one PLC. Multi-PLC support can be added by extending the architecture.

## Future Enhancements

- [ ] OPC UA protocol support
- [ ] Modbus TCP support
- [ ] PostgreSQL persistence layer
- [ ] Multi-PLC monitoring
- [ ] Advanced analytics and ML-based anomaly detection
- [ ] Integration with Grafana/Prometheus
- [ ] Role-based access control (RBAC)

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Add tests
5. Submit a pull request

## License

[Specify your license here]

## References

- SAE Paper 26MFG-0011: "From Reactive to Proactive: Applying Data Analysis and Automation to Mitigate PLC Communication Disruptions"
- [pycomm3 Documentation](https://github.com/ottowayi/pycomm3)
- [Ansible CIP Collection](https://github.com/ansible-collections/community.cip)
- [Flask-SocketIO Documentation](https://flask-socketio.readthedocs.io/)

## Support

For issues and questions:
- Open an issue on GitHub
- Contact the development team
- Review the troubleshooting section above
